We've seen how we can pass
values into a function
as parameters by
passing values like the name
or department in the
example earlier.
But what about getting
values out of a function?
This is where the concept of
return values comes to play.
The work that functions do
can produce new results.
Sure, we can print the
results on the screen,
but what if we wanted to
use those results later in
our script or didn't want
to print them at all?
We can do this by returning
values from the functions
we defined ourselves.
Let's go back to calculating
the area of a triangle.
Do you remember our
triangle example
from our earlier exercise?
The area of the
triangle is calculated
as base times height
divided by 2.
Imagine we need to calculate
this value several
times in our code.
It would be useful
to have a function
that does this for us.
Check out how this would look.
We use the keyword return to tell
Python that this is the
return value of a function.
When we call the function,
we store that value
in a variable.
Let's say we have the
two triangles and
we want to add up the
sum of both areas.
Here's what we
would do. First, we
calculate the two
areas separately.
Then, we add the sum of
both areas together.
Finally, we print the result
converting it to a string.
As you can see in this example,
the area of triangle
function returns a value
which is not surprisingly
the area of the triangle.
We store that value in
a different variable for
each call to the function.
In this case, area_a and area_b.
Then we operate with those values
adding them into the variable
called sum and only
printing this final result.
This shows the power of
the return statement.
It allows us to combine
calls to functions and to
more complex operations which
makes your code more reusable.
Return statements in
Python are even more
interesting because we can use
them to return more
than one value.
Let's say you have a duration of
time in seconds and you want to
convert that to the
equivalent number
of hours, minutes, and seconds.
Here's how to do that in Python.
Did you spot the new
operator in this function?
That double slash operator
is called floor division.
A floor division divides a number
and takes the integer part of
the division as the result.
For example, five slash slash
two is two instead of 2.5.
In our example, the first
operation is calculating
how many hours are in a
given amount of seconds.
While the second works out
how many minutes are left once we
subtract the hours and then
how many seconds remain
after subtracting minutes.
We end up with three
numbers as a result.
So the function returns
all three of them.
Let's see what this looks like
when we're calling a function.
Because we know that the
function returns three values,
we assign the result of
the function to three
different variables.
There's one last thing we should
call out about returning values.
It is possible to return
nothing and that's
perfectly okay.
Let's look at an example
from an earlier video.
Here the function just
printed a message and
didn't return anything.
What do you think would
happen if we try to
assign the value of this
function to a variable?
Let's try it out and see.
Here when we call the function it
printed a message just
like we expected.
We stored the return value
in the result variable,
but there was no return
statement in the function.
So the value of results is none.
None is a very special data
type in Python used to
indicate that things are
empty or that they
return nothing.
Wow. That was a lot to learn
about functions and
the return values.
Remember that the key to
getting this right is to
practice writing the code you've
just learned as many
times as you need.
Functions and return values can
be tricky concepts to master,
but they let us do a
bunch of cool stuff.
So put the time and
effort into learning for
some really valuable returns.